Importance of Soil testing
The basic objective of the soil-testing programme is to extend service to farmers and lead them to better and economic use of fertilizers for better soil management practices for increasing agricultural production. High crop yields cannot be obtained without applying sufficient fertilizers to overcome existing deficiencies. 
The use of fertilizers without soil testing is like taking medicine without consulting a physician to find out what is needed. The farmers are well aware of the fact that the fertilizers increase yields but not so about the right quantities, the right kind of fertilizers, the right time and the right place of application to ensure maximum profit. If fertilizer application is without a soil test than farmer may be applying too much or too little of the plant nutrients what is actually needed for proper plant growth. It is therefore, not only an uneconomical use of fertilizers but it also causes of imbalance nutrition which degrades soil health and stagnates or reduces the crop yields. Soil analysis is a valuable tool for a farm as it determines the inputs required for efficient and economic production. A proper soil test will help ensure the application of enough fertilizer to meet the requirements of the crop while taking advantage of the nutrients already present in the soil. It will also allow to determine lime or gypsum requirements and can be used to diagnose problem areas. It is very important that a sampling technique is correct as the results are only as good as the sample it is taken. Hence, soil testing is essential and is the first step in obtaining high yields and maximum returns from the money invested in fertilizers. 
Soil sample: The importance of having a truly representative sample can be very well realised from the fact that only a minute fraction of the huge soil mass of the field (8,00,000 kg up to a depth of 6 inches from one acre), representing all its heterogeneity, is actually used for analysis in the laboratory. Hence, even a small error committed during sampling gets magnified by manifolds. Therefore, while collecting samples from the soil, the following aspects should be carefully considered. The sample must properly represent the area. A field can be treated as a single unit only if it is appreciably uniform in all respects. Variation in slope, colour, texture, crop growth and management should be taken into account and separate sets of composite samples need to be collected from each of such area as shown in below figure. Recently fertilized plots, bunds, channels, marshy tracts and spots near trees, wells, compost pits or other non-representative locations, must be carefully avoided during sampling. Generally, the sample may be drawn from the plough layer (6 inches’ depth).
Sampling method: For 1-acre field, at least 10 spots in a random zig-zag manner as shown in Fig should be considered for composite sample. At each selected spot for sampling, first remove the litter from the surface. If a khurpi or kassi (spade) is used, first dig a ' V ' shaped excavation up to a depth of 6 inches (1/2 foot) and take thin slice (2.5-3.0cm) from the side as shown in Fig. Repeat the same on other side. Collect these in a clean dry container or plastic bucket for easy mixing and sub-sampling. Avoid sampling near bunds, channels, marshy spots, trees, recently fertilized area, compost pits, any other abnormal spots and other non-representative locations. 

                                           
        
                                              
Mix the sample collected thoroughly with hands on a clean piece of cloth or polythene sheet. Level it and quarter it with hand as shown in Fig. Discard the soil in the opposite quarters. Mix the rest of the soil and   continue quartering till 500g of representative soil sample is obtained. Dry the sample in shade and fill in the cloth or polythene bag. Place the label written with a pencil inside and outside the bag, giving details location, field number, name of cultivator and identification marks, relevant information regarding slope, drainage, irrigation, previous cropping history, fertilizer use, etc. Then tie the bag properly and send the sample along with the information sheet to the soil testing laboratory.                                

Compiled By : Dr M.A.A.Aziz Qreshi, Principal Scientist, ICAR-Indian Institute of Oilseeds Research, Hyderabad
