
5
a
HAVE
BOOKLET
The Rajasthan Resserch
Best Management Practices
for
Groundnut Cultivation in India
(SKNAU/2024/54)
Rajasthan Agricultural Research Institute
(S.K.N Agriculture University, Jobner)
Durgapura, Jaipur (Rajasthan) 302018
Publication No: SKNAU publication No. SKNAU/2024/54 Best Management Practices
for Groundnut Cultivation in India-Booklet
Citation: Yadav, M.R., Meena, A.K., Pareek, B., Gupta, S., Praharaj, C.S., Nataraja,
MV., Yenagi B.S. and Vemana, K. 2024. Best Management Practices for Groundnut
Cultivation in India-Booklet
Printed
:
April, 2024
Published by
:
Rajasthan Agricultural Research Institute,
(S.K.N Agriculture University)
Durgapura, Jaipur (Rajasthan) 302018
Telephone
:
0141-2550229
Fax
:
0141-2550229
e-mail
:
director.rari@sknau.ac.in
Printed at
:
Sonkhiya Computer & Colour Copier
Shop No.1, Triveni Circle, Gopalpura Bypass, Jaipur
Phone : +91-9413603050
Copyright
:
With the authors. No part of this Booklet should be reproduced
in any form without permission of the author.
AUTHORS
M. R. Yadav
A. K. Meena
Assistant Professor (Agronomy)
Assistant Professor (PBG)
RARI, Durgapura
Rari, Durgapura
Bheem Pareek
Shweta Gupta
Assistant Professor (Agronomy) Assistant Professor (Agronomy)
RARI, Durgapura
RARI, Durgapura
C.S. Praharaj
MV Nataraja
Principal Scientist (Agronomy)
Scientist (Entomology)
DGR, Junagadh
DGR, Junagadh
B.S. Yenagi
K.Vemana
Groundnut Agronomist
Principal Scientist (Pathology)
UAS, Dharwad
ANGRAU, Kadiri
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
ICAR- Directorate of Groundnut Research,
Junagadh for Financial Support
PUBLISHED BY
Rajasthan Agricultural Research Institute
(S.K.N Agriculture University, Jobner)
Durgapura, Jaipur (Rajasthan) 302018
Vice Chancellor's Message
India is the world's second-largest consumer and number one importer of vegetable oil.
Although the oilseed production in India has grown over the years, the production has
lagged its consumption, resulting in continuous dependence on import. Groundnut known
for its multifarious uses including oil production, direct human consumption as food and
also animal consumption in the form of hay, silage and cake. Being a grain legume,
peanut has an important nutritional value for human beings, and its nutritional value has
been exploited for combating malnutrition in children. Groundnut is third important
oilseed crop in India mainly grown in Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan,
Karnataka and Maharashtra. Groundnut has the potential to narrow down the import
burden of the vegetable oil as there is huge scope for the improvement in the productivity
with the adoption of improved technologies.
The average productivity is 2036 kg/ha in India which is quite low as compared to USA
(4400 kg/ha) and China (3710 kg/ha). The low and fluctuating productivity is primarily
attributed to cultivation of groundnut is mostly in rainfed condition (80%) especially on
marginal lands which are poor in fertility, use of local cultivars, inappropriate plant stand,
lower use of fertilizers and manures, poor weed management and higher incidence of
disease and insect pest. Many improved technologies have been generated through
systemic research on the various aspects of the groundnut however, their adoption taking
place at slower rate. Therefore, there is an urgent need to document the innovative
groundnut technologies which can help in raising the productivity of groundnut.
Adoption of good agricultural practices is very important in harnessing the full potential
of the crop in addition to appropriate variety and quality seed in order to facilitate a
synergistic effect on crop productivity. Although generalized agronomic
recommendations are often made, they need to be customized to meet the requirements of
specific fields and be compatible with the socio-economic conditions under which
smallholder farmer's function.
I am extremely pleased to share this space to converse with all of you and to present the
Booklet "Best Management Practices for Groundnut Cultivation in India". I hope this
bulletin will serves as a handy reference guide for the farmers, extension personnel,
students of agriculture and researchers to use improved varieties and associated
production practices to increase productivity of groundnut in India.
I congratulate the all authors for giving shape to this important bulletin and convey my
best wishes to them for grand success of this bulletin "Best Management Practices for
Groundnut Cultivation in India".
que
(Prof. Balraj Singh)
Preface
India is amongst the largest producer and consumer of vegetable oils in the World.
India is a global player in edible oil arena, being the second largest importer, and 3rd
largest consumer of edible oil as well as fourth largest oilseed producer. Indian
vegetable oil economy is the fourth largest in the world next to USA, China and
Brazil. Oilseed crops play the second important role in the Indian agricultural economy
next to food grains in terms of area and production. On the oilseeds map of the world,
India occupies a prominent position, both in regard to acreage and production. The
Indian climate is suitable for the cultivation of oilseed crops; therefore, large varieties
of oilseeds are cultivated here.
The major oilseeds cultivated in our country are soybean, rapeseed and mustard,
groundnut sunflower, castor, sesame, niger, safflower and linseed. Three main oilseeds
namely, groundnut, soybean, and rapeseed-mustard accounted for over 88% of total
oilseeds output. Groundnut is third important oilseed mainly grown in Gujarat, Andhra
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Karnataka and Maharashtra with a combined share of
about 91% in total groundnut production in the country. Groundnut occupies an area of
21.5% and production of 25.4% out of the total area and production of oilseed crops
with an average productivity of 2036 kg/ha in India which is quite low as compared
to USA and China. The low and fluctuating productivity is primarily because
cultivation of groundnut is mostly done on marginal lands, which are lacking in
irrigation and low levels of inputs are used here. Therefore, there is an urgent need to
improve the productivity of groundnut with the adoption of improved technologies.
Improved agronomy is crucial in harnessing the full potential of the crop in
addition to appropriate variety and quality seed in order to facilitate a synergistic effect
on crop productivity. Although generalized agronomic recommendations are often
made, they need to be customized to meet the requirements of specific fields and be
compatible with the socio-economic conditions under which smallholder farmers
function. Information on harvest and post-harvest operations will help ensure that
smallholder farmers produce high quality groundnuts fetching them a higher price in
the market. Looking to the need of farmers, this publication entitled "Best
Management Practices for Groundnut Cultivation in India" provides an overview of
different improved technologies to be adopted to enhance the productivity of
groundnut. Data and photographs in this bulletin have been taken from the published
articles, reports of AICRP on Groundnut, training manuals and various bulletins.
We shall consider our effort fruitful if this Booklet serves the purpose of guiding
farmers, extension personnel, and students of agriculture and researchers to use
improved varieties and associated production practices to increase productivity of
groundnut in India.
We are aware of the possibility of shortcomings and defects in this Booklet. We
shall appreciate if the readers could bear with them and communicate the same to us
so that we can bring out a better edition next time.
Authors
Introduction
Groundnut also known as peanut, monkeynut, earthnut or moongfali is not only one of
the most important oilseed crops but also an important export commodity in India.
Globally, Groundnut covers 327 lakh hectares with the production of 539 lakh tonnes with the
productivity of 1648 kg per hectare (FAOSTAT, 2021). With annual all-season coverage of,
globally, India with acreage of 54.2 lakh hectares ranks first under cultivation and is the
second largest producer with 101 lakh tonnes with productivity of 1863 kg per hectare during
2021-22. The cultivation of groundnut in country mainly concentrated to Gujarat, Rajasthan,
Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, and Madhya Pradesh. Gujarat is the
largest producer of groundnut contributing 36 per cent of the total production followed by
Rajasthan (17 %), Tamil Nadu (7.5 %). It is one of the important export commodity also and
India has exported 668,885 MT of groundnut to various countries of the World during the year
2022-23 which worth of 6735 crore.
Groundnut plays an important role in the dietary requirement of resource poor woman
and children. Groundnut kernels are also used for the preparation of food products like
chikkis, groundnut milk, butter, curd including different bakery products. Groundnut cake
obtained after extraction of oil, is used as valuable organic manure and feeding material for
livestock. The peanut haulms contain crude protein 8- 5%, lipids 1-3% and minerals 9-10%.
These are used as cattle feed either in fresh or in dried stage or preparing hay or silage. The
peanut shells or pod walls which constitute nearly about 25% of total pod weight are used as
bedding material for poultry or as mulching material during summer season to reduce the
evaporative losses. Shell material is also used as filler material for making mixed fertilizers
and as insulation material for buildings or as fuel in boilers.
Improved agronomy is crucial in harnessing the full potential of the crop in addition to
appropriate variety and quality seed in order to facilitate a synergistic effect on crop
productivity. This farmer friendly booklet provides information on improved cultural practices
in groundnut cultivation which will empower smallholder farmer to make his/her own decision
on various components of integrated crop management technology. Although generalized
agronomic recommendations are often made, they need to be customized to meet the
requirements of specific fields and be compatible with the socio-economic conditions under
which smallholder farmers function. Information on harvest and post-harvest operations will
help ensure that smallholder farmers produce high quality groundnuts fetching them a higher
price in the market
Table 1. Year wise acreage, production and productivity of groundnut in India
Year
Area (M ha)
Production (M tonnes)
Productivity (kg/ha)
2015-16
4.60
6.73
1465
2016-17
5.34
7.46
1398
2017-18
4.89
9.25
1893
2018-19
4.73
6.72
1422
2019-20
4.30
9.95
2310
2020-21
5.57
10.21
1831
2021-22
5.42
10.10
1863
2022-23
4.91
10.06
2036
Source: agricoop.nic.in.
Cropping Season/sowing time
Groundnut is a tropical plant that requires a long, warm growing season. A well-
distributed rainfall of at least 50 cm during growing season, abundant sunshine and relatively
warm temperatures are best suited for its cultivation. Groundnut is cultivated in one or more
(kharif, rabi and summer) seasons, but nearly 85% of acreage and production comes from
kharif crop (June- November). About 85% of groundnut grown in India is sown in the kharif
season. Kharif groundnut mainly grown in the states of Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh mostly under rain-fed
conditions. The time of sowing varies from June to November depending on the type of soil
and rainfall. Groundnut yield in the rainy season is lower than in the post-rainy season due to
cloudy weather and the presence of diseases and insect pests.
About 15% of the crop is raised during the rabi/summer season. Rabi groundnut is grown
from November to April mostly in central, eastern and southern parts of the country. It is
mostly grown in rice fallow situations under residual moisture conditions or with limited
irrigation facility and in river-bed fields of Orissa, Assam and West Bengal. In areas where
irrigation is available or assured, the summer is ideal for groundnut cultivation. The cultivation
of groundnut during January to May/June as summer crop mainly concentrated to some parts
of Gujarat, Maharashtra Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan. Good
sunshine and high temperature favour pod formation during summer season.
Soil and field preparation
Groundnut can be grown in range of the soils in India such as sandy, sandy loam and
heavy black soils. But well-drained, light-textured, loose sandy-loam or sandy clay loam soils
with good drainage, having reasonable high calcium and sufficient sulphur, pH 5.5 to 7.0 and
medium to high organic matter are most suitable soils for groundnut production. The highly
acidic soils (pH <5.5), and highly alkaline soils (pH >7.8) are not suitable for groundnut
production. In case the pH is <5.5, lime in appropriate form and quantity should be mixed
thoroughly into the soil before land preparation or at the time of land preparation so as to bring
it into the optimal range. The rate of application of lime depends upon the type of lime, soil
type and depth of application. As a general recommendation, it would require furrow
application of 2.0 t/ha of lime to raise the soil pH from 5.0 to 6.5.
Field preparation for groundnut depends on the soil type and onset of monsoon for
rainfed crops and the previous crops grown for irrigated crop. The soils are usually ploughed
twice with the summer rains or after application of irrigation water for winter/summer sowing
followed by two to three harrowing and pulverizing well to obtain a good tilth for optimum
germination. Summer ploughing is advantageous to kill weed seeds and hibernating insects
and diseases organisms by exposing them to the heat of summer. In terrace and flat lands of
high rainfall areas, raised beds with an width of 90 to 120 cm accommodating 3 to 4 rows of
10-15 cm height are to be prepared to avoid water-logging problems.
Seed quality and treatment
Good quality seed of improved varieties suitable for the area is one of the most
important factors for increasing productivity. Good quality seed is essential for establishing the
required plant population, good development and yield. Purity, good viability, uniformity of
seed size, colour, weight and freedom from seed-borne diseases are the chief characteristics of
good seed. This can be achieved by the use of certified seeds. Bunch types have non-dormant
seeds whereas semi-spreading and spreading have dormant seeds. The non-dormant seeds
germinate immediately after maturity. The dormant seeds usually require a resting period of 60
to 75 days to obtain maximum germination. Dormancy can be broken by exposing seeds to
ethrel solution of 250 ppm at the time sowing. Groundnut pods for seed purpose are shelled
either by hand or by using hand decorticator or by power operated decorticator about a week in
advance of sowing. The viability of seed will be lost if shelled long before seeding. After and
during the shelling split or damaged, shriveled immature and infected seeds should be removed
and only well-filled seed should be used for sowing. The seed must be tested for their
germination and less than 70% is not considered satisfactory as prescribed as seed standards
for certification of labeled seed.
Seed should be treated with Carboxin 37.5% + Thiram 37.5 % DS @ 2-3g/kg
kernel to control seed borne diseases. The seed can also be treated with Trichoderma viride
@ 10 g/kg seed or it can be applied @ 10 kg/ha as soil application. In white grub and
termite endemic areas to prevent the seed damage from soil insects at initial stages,
imidacloprid 600 FS @ 6.5 ml/kg seed can be used. Thereafter, the kernels should also be
treated with suitable Rhizobium and PSB cultures (3 packets of each).
Sowing methods
The groundnut is generally sown on flat beds. Some of the improved methods to get
higher yield over the conventional method are given below:
1. Criss-cross sowing
In this method, total seed lot is divided into two equal halves; first half of the seed is sown in
one direction adopting 30 cm spacing between rows and then the remaining half in the
perpendicular direction with the same spacing. Criss-cross method can improve yield by about
18% as compared to conventional sowing by maintaining uniform distribution of seed and
optimum number of plants/unit area. The seed rate used in this method is same as in
conventional method. The only disadvantage in this method is inter-cultivation and earthing up.
So, this method is suitable for light soils.
2. Broad-bed and furrow method (BBF)
BBF method is useful in areas having deep vertisol with high rainfall. This system consists
of raised beds of 0.90 to 1.2 m width and 15 cm height with two furrows of 30 cm width on
either side. Each raised bed would accommodate three to four rows with 30 cm spacing between
rows. On an average, 15% higher yield of groundnut has been reported from the medium
black soil over the flat bed.
Raised bed sown groundnut
Flat bed sown groundnut
3. Ridge and furrow method
Groundnut is generally sown on flat beds using a seed drill but sowing on either sides
of the ridge helps the plants to prevent from come in direct contact with the excess
water. Furrows are more advantageous as they increase moisture recharge in the soil
by colleting water and simultaneously help in draining away excess water.
Spacing and seed rate
Inadequate crop stand is one of the major factors limiting the productivity of groundnut.
Optimum plant population depends on plant type (bunch or spreading), soil, moisture and
management practices. Higher plant population reduces the number of branches per plant while
lower plant population increases the number of branches/plant. Number of pods/plant increases
with increase in number of branches/plant. Seed rate depends upon the size of kernels, test
weight (100-kernel weight), inter-and- intra-row spacing. The most common spacing
recommended for bunch type varieties is 30 cm X 10 cm to achieve a plant population of 3.33
lakh/ha The usual seed requirement of bunch type groundnut is 100-110 kg/ha. The most
common spacing recommended for semi-spreading and spreading varieties is 40-45 cm X 10 cm
or 30 cm X 15 cm to achieve a plant population of 2.22 lakh/ha in rabi/summer groundnut. To
achieve the optimum plant stand of semi-spreading and spreading varieties by considering their
hundred kernel weight and inter-and- intra-row spacing following seed rates should be adequate.
Table 2 Seed rates of spreading and semi spreading groundnut
Hundred kernel weight (g)
Seed rate (Kernel kg/ha)
40-50
100-110
50-60
120-140
60-70
145-160
70-80
165-185
80-90
190-210


Cropping systems
Crop sequences: In general, groundnut should be rotated with cereals like pearl millet,
sorghum, maize, wheat, rice or other minor millets. This will check the build-up of pests,
white grubs, nematodes, soil borne diseases, leaf spots and also maintain soil fertility. Some
of the promising crop sequences recommended for different states are given below
Intercropping: The most important cereal intercrops grown with groundnut are bajra,
sorghum and maize. The other long duration crops suitable for intercropping with groundnut
are red gram, cotton, castor, cassava while short duration crops are sesame, sunflower,
cowpea, green gram and black gram. Intercropping systems suggested for different states are
presented in table 2 along their proportions with the groundnut as base crop.
Table 4. Promising crop sequences recommended for different states involving groundnut
State
Rainfed
Residual
Irrigated (Double or
(Monocropping)-
moisture
triple cropping in one
two years
(Double cropping
year
in one year)
Andhra Pradesh
Groundnut-sorghum
Groundnut-bengal
Groundnut-maize
Gram
Groundnut-millet
Groundnut-
Groundnut-wheat
Safflower
Groundnut-tobacco
Groundnut-sesame
Groundnut-onion
Gujarat
Groundnut-sesame
Groundnut-fodder
Groundnut-mustard-
Sorghum
green gram
Groundnut-
Groundnut-wheat-
Mustard
green gram
Karnataka
Groundnut-sorghum
Groundnut-
Groundnut-wheat
safflower
Groundnut-maize
Groundnut-sunflower
Maharashtra
Groundnut-sorghum
Groundnut-
Rice-potato-
Safflower
Groundnut
Groundnut-fodder
Groundnut-
maize
Rabi sorghum
Groundnut-safflower
Tamil Nadu
Groundnut-sesame
Groundnut-sesame
Rice-rice- groundnut
Groundnut-cotton
Groundnut-rice-green
Gram
Groundnut-maize
Rajasthan
Groundnut-pearl millet
Groundnut-barley
Groundnut-wheat-
green gram
Groundnut-
Groundnut-wheat
Mustard
Madhya Pradesh
Groundnut-sorghum
Groundnut-
Groundnut-wheat/ mustard
safflower
Orissa
Groundnut-
Groundnut-bengal
Groundnut-rice/ragi
sorghum/pearl millet
Gram
Groundnut-sesame
Groundnut-
coriander/cumin
(Source: Jain, N.K., Garhwal, R.S., Meena, H.N. and Patel, H.V. 2013. Technologies to Enhance Groundnut Productivity
-Booklet, Directorate of Groundnut Research, Junagadh- 362 001, Gujarat, India.)
Table 5.Some intercropping systems in different states.
State
Intercropping system
Ratio to base crop
(groundnut)
Andhra Pradesh
Groundnut + pearl millet
3: 1
Groundnut + cowpea
6 1
Groundnut + red gram
6 :1 or 8 : 1 or 10 : 2
Groundnut + castor
5 : 1 or 7: 1
Gujarat
Groundnut + sesame
1:1
Groundnut + sunflower
1:1
Groundnut + red gram
3 :1
Groundnut + castor
1 1
Karnataka
Groundnut + red gram
4 1
Groundnut + cotton
3: 1 or 5 : 1
Groundnut + sorghum/ragi
6 1
Maharashtra
Groundnut + sorghum
4 : 1 or 6 : 2
Groundnut + red gram
6 : 1 or 10 : 2
Madhya Pradesh
Groundnut + red gram
8 : 2 or 10 : 2
Groundnut + soybean
4 : 1 or 6 : 1
Groundnut + sesame
4 1
Tamil Nadu
Groundnut + black gram/green gram
6 1
Groundnut + cotton
5: 1
Groundnut + castor
7 1
Groundnut + sesame
6 : 1
Rajasthan
Groundnut + pearl millet
4 : 1
Groundnut + sesame
4 : 1
(Source: Jain, N.K., Garhwal, R.S., Meena, H.N. and Patel, H.V. 2013. Technologies to Enhance Groundnut Productivity
-Booklet, Directorate of Groundnut Research, Junagadh- 362 001, Gujarat, India.)
Manures and fertilizers
In general, for obtaining high yield of groundnut application of well decomposed farmyard
manure @ 10 t/ha at least three to four weeks 21 days before sowing followed by
recommended doses of N, P₂O₅ and K2O through urea, single super phosphate (SSP) and
muriate of potash, respectively is recommended depending upon the initial soil fertility status
and nature of crop. If SSP is not available, P₂O₅ can be supplied through DAP, 12:32:16 and
other complex fertilizers by suitable calculation according RDF.
Table 6 Recommended doses of N, P₂O₅ and K2O (kg/ha) for different states
State
Situation
N
P₂O₅
K2O
Andhra Pradesh and
Rainfed
20
40
20
Telangana
Irrigated
30
60
45
Gujarat
Rainfed
12.5-25
25-60
0
Irrigated
25-37.5
50-70
0
Karnataka
Rainfed
18
46
25
Irrigated
25
75
25
Madhya Pradesh
Rainfed
20
40
20
Punjab
Irrigated
15
40
25
Rajasthan
Rainfed
15-20
60
30
Irrigated
15-20
60
30
Maharashtra
Irrigated
20
40
0
Uttar Pradesh
Rainfed
15
30
45
West Bengal
Irrigated
15
30
45
Tamil Nadu
Rainfed
11
22
33
Irrigated
22
44
66
(Source: Jain, N.K., Garhwal, R.S., Meena, H.N. and Patel, H.V. 2013. Technologies to Enhance Groundnut Productivity
-Booklet, Directorate of Groundnut Research, Junagadh- 362 Gujarat, India.)
For a rainfed crop, entire doses of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium should be applied by
placement at seeding in the furrow below the seed at sowing. Now a days, it is very easy place
fertilizer below the root zone by using seed cum fertilizer drill.
Special requirement of Calcium and Sulphur
These two nutrients are taken up from the pod zone by the pegs and developing pods.
Groundnut has the unique characteristic of uptake of Ca and S by the developing pegs and pods.
The major function of calcium in groundnut is the improvement in the quality of the nuts as
evidenced by thin strong shell besides well-filled pods. Sulphur is directly involved in the
biosynthesis of oil and is usually deficient in the groundnut soils. Gypsum (24% Ca, 18.6% S) is
the cheapest source for Calcium and Sulphur elements. Higher quantities of gypsum than
necessary are applied at early flowering stage to ensure adequate calcium supply in the pod
zone. Application of well - powdered gypsum (30 mesh) @ 500 kg/ha at the time sowing is
recommended to overcome the deficiency of Ca and S and increase the pod yield stage.
Correction of micronutrient deficiencies
Groundnut is also sensitive to the deficiency of micronutrients such as B, Zn and Fe. The
micronutrient deficiency can be corrected by applying them either to the soil or in standing crop
Table 7. Schedule for controlling micronutrient deficiencies
Micronutrient
Form and rate of allocation to soil
Spray schedule
Boron
Borax 5-20 kg/ha
0.2% borax
Copper
Copper sulphate 5-10 kg/ha
0.1% copper sulphate + 0.05% lime
Manganese
Manganese sulphate 10-50 kg/ha
0.6% MnSo₄+0.3% lime
Zinc
Zinc sulphate 10-50 kg/ha
0.5% zinc sulphate + 0.2 % lime
Molybdenum
Ammonium molybdate 0.5-1.0 kg/ha
0.01% ammonium molybdate
Iron
Ferrous sulphate 10 kg/ha
0.5% ferrous sulphate+ 0.05% lime
(Source: Jain, N.K., Garhwal, R.S., Meena, H.N. and Patel, H.V. 2013. Technologies to Enhance Groundnut Productivity
-Booklet,Directorate of Groundnut Research, Junagadh- 362 001, Gujarat, India.)
Weed management
Weeds cause much damage to the groundnut crop during the first 35 days of its
growth. The most critical period of weed competition is from 3-6 weeks after sowing. The
average yield loss due to weeds is about 45%. When once pegging begins (40 DAS), there
should not be any disturbance to pegs through manual or mechanical weeding. Important
weed flora in the groundnut crop can be categorized in three classes :-
A) Grassy Weeds: Dactyloctenium aegyptium (Crow foot grass); Echinochloa
colonum (Water grass); Panicum repens (Torpedo grass); Chloris barbata (Many spiked
chloris); Commelina benghalensis (Tropical spider wort); Cynodon dactylon (Bermuda
grass); Tragus biflorus (carrot-seed grass); Eragrostis ciliaris (Stink grass); Brachiaria
ramosa (Signal grass); Saccharum spontaneum (Thatch grass); Sorghum
halepense (Johnson grass).
B) Broad Leaved Weeds: Tridax procumbens (Coat-button); Celosia argentea (Feather
cocks comb); Euphorbia hirta (Pill-pod euphorbia); Phyllanthus niruri (Flyroost leaf
flower); Amaranthus viridis (Pig weed); Cleome viscosa (Spider flower); Trianthema
portulacastrum (Dessert horse purslane); Portulaca oleracea (Common purslane);
Boerhaavia diffusa (Hog weed); Tribulus terrestris (Puncture vine); Euphorbia
pulcherrima (Common Poinsettia); Acanthospermum hispidum (Star bur); Ageratum
conyzoides (Tropical ageratum); Croton sparsiflorus (Croton); Coccinia grandis (India
ivygourd); Cassia occidentalis (Coffee senna); Digera arvensis (Digera) and Solanum
nigrum (Black night shade).
C) Sedges: Cyperus rotundus (Motha); Cyperus esculentus (Yellow nut sedge).
Management
A good crop cover by adopting right spacing between rows and within the row will smother
the weed growth.
Mulching the soil surface in between rows with crop residue material like straw etc may
prevent the germination of weed seeds and at the same time smothers the established young
weeds.
Adopting proper crop rotation practices will help in overcoming the dominance of certain
weeds and lessening the weed competition in groundnut crop.
Intercropping practice in groundnut crop not only provide the monetary and land utilization
advantages but also help in smothering the weeds with good crop cover over the land
surface.
Hand pulling of weeds though primitive is an efficient way of controlling weeds especially in
groundnut.
Hand weeding should be done twice, first around 20-25 days after sowing and second at
about 35-40 days after sowing.
Cost effective weed management under rainfed conditions is repeated inter-cultivation
(harrowing) up to 35 days after sowing followed by hand weeding.
Chemical weed control is preferred because of less labour involvement and no mechanical
damage to the crop that happens during manual weeding. Moreover, the control is highly
effective as the weeds even within the rows are killed, which invariably escape during
mechanical control.
Where labour is scarce and expensive, the use of herbicides either alone or in combination
with cultural methods to control the weeds effectively and in time has become a necessity.
Application of Diclosulam 84% WDG @ 20 to 25 g/ha or Pendimethalin+Imazathapyr 32
EC (Readymix) @1.0 kg ai/ha can be applied to the soil surface within 2 days of groundnut
sowing. The effect of pre-emergence herbicides lasts 6-7 weeks after which fresh flushes of
weeds emerge.
To control the weeds at the later stage of crop post-emergence application of Quizalofop
ethyl @ 0.50 kg a.i./ha or Imazethapyr @ 0.50 kg a.i./ha should be applied to the crop at 18-
20 DAS of groundnut or when weeds are at 3 to 4 leaf stage.
Integrated weed management involving the above two appears most effective and
economical, provided the crop is not subjected to prolonged drought or soil moisture stress
during the crop period.
Application of Diclosulam 84% WDG @ 20 to 25 g ha⁻¹ followed by 1 hand weeding at 30-
35 DAS or Diclosulam 84 % WDG @ 20-25 g a.i. ha⁻¹ (PE) fb Quizalofop Ethyl 5% EC 50 g
a.i., ha⁻¹ (POE) at 20-30 days after sowing.
Groundnut under weedy check
Groundnut under weed free condition
Water management
Groundnut crop is mostly cultivated during kharif under rainfed conditions. Irrigated
groundnut accounts for over 20% of the total area under the crop in the country and it yields
around 4.2 t/ha.
There is no necessity for irrigation or rainfall up to 25 days after emergence of
groundnut.
Flowering (20-40 DAS), pod formation and development (40-70 DAS) and pod filling
and maturation (70-100 DAS) are most sensitive to soil moisture stress.
Scheduling irrigation at 25% depletion of available soil moisture (DASM) during
moisture sensitive stages and at 50% DASM during other stages results in high pod
yield and water use efficiency.
An IW/CPE ratio of 1.0 at moisture sensitive stages and 0.6 during other stages leads to
high water use efficiency. Irrigate at 10-12 days interval is usual practice during summer
groundnut.
At times of deficit supplies, an irrigation at 25 DAS followed by 2 at 15 days interval
between 45 and 75 DAS appears to be minimum requirement and it can minimize yield
losses due to soil moisture stress. The first irrigation is given at 25 DAS to create
moisture stress in the soil which is desirable:
to get the good root system.
to reduce excessive vegetative growth.
encourage the better nodulation
induce heavy flowering in a single flush (synchronous flowering)
Keeping the total quantity of irrigation water applied constant, high frequency irrigation
increase the pod field of groundnut on sandy and sandy loam soils.
Depending on soil type, evapotranspiration and crop duration, water requirement of
groundnut ranges between 450 and 650 mm.
The crop is usually irrigated by check basin method. Border strip is more suitable than
other methods.
Sprinkler irrigation is generally adopted for groundnut considering the crop height and the
nature of fruiting. The costs are also low for sprinkler compared to drip.
The irrigation quantum (mm) is decided after studying the soil texture and its infiltration
capacity. Application rate per irrigation should be equivalent to the infiltration rate of the
soil of each location approximately this would be 15-20 mm at a time for the soil types
mentioned above
Recently drip irrigation is becoming popular among groundnut growers as it increases
crop yield by 25-40% besides better seed quality and saves up to 40-50% irrigation
water compared to flood irrigation.
For drip irrigation in groundnut, drip laterals (having drippers at 30 cm distance and 1.75-
2.0 kg/cm² pressure and 4 liter/hour discharge rate) should be installed at the interval of
three rows (row spacing 30 cm) or keep 90 cm distance between two laterals which
should be operated for 50 minutes in the month of June and 30 minutes during rest of the
crop period (July to October) on alternate days. This system saves about 60% water and
gives higher yield in comparison to surface irrigation systems.
Overview of groundnut crop under drip irrigation
Plant protection measures
Major insect pest and management
Insect pests cause severe losses to groundnut and are recognized as one of the major
constraints in groundnut production. Although more than 90 species of insect pests attack
groundnut crop, only a few are economically important over large areas.
White grub
White grubs, Holotrichia spp. are serious pests in northern states. The young grubs feed
on rootlets and nodules, the older grubs in third instar devour the entire tap root and such
plants wither and die. The damage usually occurs in patches in field and the crop nearer
to the hosts of adult beetles suffers heavy damage.
Management
Summer ploughing helps to collect and destroy the larvae and pupae of the pest.
Early sowing may be useful in escaping from grub damage.
Setting up light trap especially during May and June months (a day after the first
summer rains) to monitor and collect the adult beetles.
Collect adult beetles of white grubs attracted to trees like neem, Acacia on receipt of
monsoon shower and destroy them.
Branches of neem, tamarind and Acacia trees, around the field may be pruned and
sprayed with chlorpyriphos @ 3 ml/lit of water.
Hand pick the adults resting in the soil during day time and destroy.
Seed treatment with chlorpyriphos @ 10-15 ml/kg of seed or with imidacloprid 600 FS
@ 6.5 ml/kg of seed
Application of imidacloprid 17.8 SL @ 500 mal/ha or chlorpyriphos @ 4.0 lit of /ha in
standing crop.
White grub under field
Adult beetles of white grubs
Tobacco caterpillar, Gram pod borer and Red hairy caterpillar
These defoliators inflict economic losses only when the foliage damage exceeds 25%.
Management
Management can be done by growing of resistant/tolerant cultivar, growing of trap crop
such as sunflower and castor bean on borders or in groundnut field (1 plant 20/m),
destroying of egg masses on trap crops, encouraging larvae predation by birds by
providing perches in the field (10-15/ha) and application of nuclear polyhedrosis virus
(NPV) @ 250 LE/ha, obtained from a reliable source and neem seed kernel extract @
extract obtained from 10 kg neem seed powder/ha or application of quinalphos 20 EC
@750 ml/ha in standing crop.
Tobacco caterpillar
Red hairy caterpillar
Leafminer
Adult light brown in colour, small blister like mines appear on the upper surface of the
leaf, at sever stage, entire leaflet becomes brown and it rolls, shrivels and dries up and
gives burnt appearance from the distance in the field.
Management:
Collection and destruction of moths by setting light traps, monitoring of pest using yellow
sticky pheromone traps @ 4 per acre. In field condition, if more than 50% of leaf miner
infected with natural enemies need not to spray any chemical. Spray with Quinolphos @
500 ml/ha or Chlorpyriphos @ 1250 ml/ha or Flubendiamide 39.35SC @ 75-100 ml/ha or
Spinosad 45 SC @ 150 ml/ha.
Sucking pests
Aphid
Nymph and adult attack on young branches, suck sap from young leaves and flowers,
plants will become weak and stunted, In case of severe infestation, they excrete the honey
substance. Flower drop occurs in severe cases.
Jassid
Nymph and adults suck the sap from under surface of the leaves, as result inverted "V"
shape yellowing on tip of the leaf. Total leaves become yellowing in severe cases and low
temperature and high rainfall favors the pest incidence.
Thrips
Nymphs and adults suck the sap from the leaf, brown color blisters can be seen under side
of the leaf, in severe case curling of leaves and stunting of the crop observed. Thrips
palmi transmits Groundnut bud necrosis virus as virus and vector specificity existed.
Aphid
Jassid
Management:
Population of natural enemies viz; coccinellids, syrphids and Green lays wings present
more than 50% , no sprayings against aphids. Seed treatment with Imidacloprid 600 FS
or Thiamethoxam @ 2 ml/kg seed (1:3 ratio chemical and water), border crop with
bajra/jowar (4-6 rows), spraying with Imidachloprid @ 150 ml/ha at 20 DAS or
Thiaclorpid 480 SC @ 125 ml/ha or Thiocloprid 25 WG @ 100 g/ha or Acetamiprid 20
SP @ 100 g/ha.
Damage done by thrips
Major diseases and management
Aspergillus seedling blight or collar rot/foot rot
It appears 14 days after sowing. Collar rot led to rapid desiccation of the affected
plant, affected tissue at collar region is covered with black mass of spores. In immature
plants, lesions develop on the stem just below the soil surface and then spread upward
along the branches. In matured plants, symptoms generally do not appear until the wilting
of the entire plant is apparent. More prevalent in light sandy soils.
Collor rot Seedling rot
Black conidial head of fungi
Management
Selection of healthy seed, use of tolerant genotypes: J11, JCG-88 and OG-52-1, Seed
treatment with Mancozeb 50 %+ Carbendazim 25 % WS @ 3 g/kg seed or Corbaxin 37.5
%+ Thiram 37.5 % DS @ 3 g/kg seed, deep sowing of seed should be avoided, deep
ploughing of fields and destruction of plant debris, soil application before sowing with
Trichoderma asperellum 5 kg/ha after enriched by mixing in 225 kg farm yard manure
after 15 days of incubation.
Leaf spot diseases (Early leaf spot and late leaf spot)
Yield loses ranged from 10.0 % to 50.0 %. In the absence of fungicide sprays, leaf spots
can cause yield losses >50%. Temperatures in the 25 to 30°C range and high relative
humidity (>80.0 %) favors infection and disease development. In case of early leaf spot,
the lesions are sub circular and 1-10 mm diameter and dark brown on the upper surface of
the leaf. In case of late leaf spot, the lesions on the lower surface of leaf are small, more
nearly circular and darker than those of early leaf spot. Both the lesions also appears on
the stem, petiole and pegs.
Early leaf spot
Late leaf spot
Management
Seed treatment with Mancozeb 50%+ Carbendazim 25 % WS @ 3 g/kg seed or Corbaxin
37.5 %+ Thiram 37.5 % DS @ 3 g/kg seed, spraying of Mancozeb 75 WP @ 1000
g+Carbendazim 50 WP@ 500 g /ha or Hexaconazole 5% SC @ 500 ml or Chlorothalonil
75 WP @ 1000 g or Tebuconazole 25.9 EC @ 500 ml/ha in 500 liter of water twice at
fortnightly intervals starting from first disease appearance.
Rust Disease (Puccinia arachidis)
Orange coloured pustules appear on the lower surface of the leaflets, in severe cases,
lesions also appear on other plant parts except flowers
Abaxial Surface (Orange pustules)
Adaxial surface
Management
Growing of resistant genotypes viz., Girnar 1, ICGV 87160, ICGV 86590, ICGV 86325,
DRG 12, TAG 24, ALR 2, BSR 1, OG-52-1, ALR 3, VRI 5, CO 4, ALR 1, CSMG84-1,
ICGS-5, DRG -17 and GPBD4. Removal of infected plant debris, collect seed from
disease free areas, seed treatment with Seed treatment with Mancozeb 50 %+
Carbendazim 25 % WS @ 3 g/kg seed or Corbaxin 37.5 %+ Thiram 37.5 % DS @ 3 g/kg
seed, spraying of Mancozeb 75 WP @1000 gha or Chlorothalonil 75 WP @1000 g or
Hexaconazole 5 SC @ 500 ml or Tebuconazole 25.9 EC @ 500 ml/ha in 500 liter of
water at 15 days interval starting from disease appearance.
Stem rot (Sclerotium rolfsii)
Appears generally after 70 days of sowing to harvest stage, yellowing and wilting of
branches just above the soil, whitish mycelium of the fungus develops around the affected
stem above the soil level, infection of pegs and pods occurs in severe case and seeds turn
to bluish colour.
Symptoms of stem rot
Management
Follow the deep ploughing in summer, selection of healthy seed, seed treatment with Seed
treatment with Mancozeb 50 %+ Carbendazim 25 % WS @ 3 g/kg seed or Corbaxin 37.5
%+ Thiram 37.5 % DS @ 3 g/kg seed, soil application before sowing with Trichoderma
asperellum 5 kg/ha after enriched by mixing in 225 kg farm yard manure after 15 days of
incubation. Gypsum application @ 500 kg/ ha at the time of pegging stage (45-50 DAS)
is recommended. Timely control of foliar diseases lead to reduction of incidence of stem
rot at the end.
Dry root rot (Rhizoctonia bataticola)
Appears at any stage of the crop and severe during drought period, first water soaked
necrotic spots appear on the stem just above the ground level, later develop into blackish
when they spread to aerial parts and down into roots. If the infection girdles the stem,
wilting follows. Roots are commonly attacked, tap root become black with abundant
sclerotia and rotten and shredded. Leaf infection characterized by marginal zonate and
irregular spots.
Management
Practice deep ploughing in summer, selection of healthy seed for sowing, seed treatment
with Seed treatment with Mancozeb 50 %+ Carbendazim 25 % WS @ 3 g/kg seed or
Corbaxin 37.5 % + Thiram 37.5 % DS @ 3 g/kg seed, Soil application of Trichoderma
asperellum developed by mixing 225 kg FYM in 5 kg Trichoderma asperellum and allow
to grow for 15 days under shade by covering gunny bags. Timely management of
irrigation schedule is required without allowing the plants to dry. Do not allow plants to
wilt during critical stages of crop.
Rotten and shredding of tap root
Peanut bud necrosis disease
Initial symptoms appear on young leaflets as chlorotic spots and develop in to chlorotic or
necrotic ring spots, terminal bud necrosis on main stem followed by necrosis of top
growing buds on all primaries, stunting growth with reduced size of leaflets and petioles,
infected plants become dwarf and show axillary shoot proliferation with small leaves
having mosaic and distortion of lamina. Early infection leads to no flower and pods. Late
infection led to few pods with reduced size and mottled testa.
Initial chlorotic ring spots
Death of top growing bud
Management
Growing border crop of jowar (4 rows) with higher seed rate (@ 200 kg/ha) of
groundnut treated with imidacloprid 600 FS @ 1 ml/kg of seed followed by foliar
application with thiocloprid 480 SC@ 150 ml/ha at 20 DAS, and acetamiprid 20 SP @
100 g/ha at 35-40 DAS. Seed treatment with Imidacloprid 600 FS @ 1 ml/kg seeds +
Foliar sprays using Thiocloprid 480 SC @ 0.3 ml/l at 20-25 DAS followed by Fipronil
5SC @ 1 ml/l @ 40DAS and Acetamaprid 20 SP @ 0.2 g/l at 60 DAS).
Harvesting and storage
As groundnut is an indeterminate crop, hence synchronous maturity of its pods can
not be obtained. Therefore, harvesting should be done when 75-80% of pods are fully
mature.
The important indications of maturity are yellowing of foliage, necrotic spotting of
leaves, dropping of old leaves, pods become very hard and tough, they give cracking
sound when split open with fingers, the inside of the shell turning dark, with netted
venation, seed coat develops pink or red colour (normal colour of the varieties) and
raising of the soil to the base of the stem is observed.
Generally harvesting is done by pulling or lifting the plants from the soil with pods
intact. If soil moisture is adequate, then hand pulling. If soil is dry, tractor or bullock
drawn blades are used for lifting the vines with pods.
Harvesting before maturity reduces yield and oil percentage and seeds are highly
susceptible to aflatoxin. If delayed, results in increased incidence of stem rot,
weakening of gynophore/peduncle and some of the pods may remain in soil
itself at the time of harvesting.
The most common method is stripping pods with hand. At the time of harvest, pods
usually have moisture content around 40-50% and hence need to be dried to 10%
moisture content for safe storage. Drying should be done rapidly to prevent fungal
infection. Sun drying is the usual method of drying. Summer groundnut should be
dried in shade to prevent loss of viability, if it is for seed purpose.
Immature
Optimum mature
Overmature
Storage at farmer level is invariably in the form of pods. Farmers usually dispose of
groundnut pods within a month from drying yard itself. A few store it for 6 months
(till kharif seeding) in anticipation of high price.
Pods for seed purpose are stored for 7-8 months. Pods for seed purpose are stored in
earthern pots, mud bins or bamboo baskets or Gunny bags having polythene lining.
If the seed moisture content is above the critical level of 9-10%, then aflatoxin production
due to Aspergillus flavus just before the post-harvest drying and mould growth at later
stage takes place.
With improved varieties and matching crop production and protection technologies, the
productivity of groundnut can be achieved in the tune of 2-3 t/ha for the kharif rainfed
ecologies and 2.5-4.0 t/ha for rabi/summer (irrigated ecologies).
DIRECTOR
EXTICTURAL
Rajasthan Agricultural Research Institute
(S.K.N Agriculture University, Jobner)
Durgapura, Jaipur (Rajasthan) 302018